# Incident: 2024-11-30 17-19-30

## Summary

Between the hours of 16:48 and 22:02 (UTC) on 11/30/2020, 3 users encountered abonormally high latency on the order router's post endpoint. The event was triggered by an attack on JWT Pizza Factory sometime between these hours. The attack contained some kind of internal mechanism that altered the efficiency of JWT Pizza Factory's JWT production. 

A bug in this code caused the JWT Pizza Factory creation endpoint to spike in latency. The event was detected by the Grafana pizzaCreation latency metric. The team started working on the event by analyzing the JSON request and response bodies of pizza order requests. This moderately serious incident affected 100% of users who attempted to order pizzas during this timeframe, but nobody outside of this timeframe.

Fortunetely, Warren's JWT Pizza service hasn't grown in significant popularity yet, so no external damage was reported.


## Detection

Sadly, the alerts on Warren's JWT Pizza server weren't as airtight as they should have been. While alerts had previously been established to trigger at the activation of the "chaos" endpoint (/api/auth/chaos), additional alerts were not put into use monitoring the vital metrics of the server. If these daily alerts had been in place, the incident could have been discovered almost instantly.

As the chaos endpoint wasn't hit as part of the attack, nobody was alerted for the incident. Fortunetaly, Warren himself was monitoring the metrics and logs peridodically throughout the day. Warren didn't report anything out of the ordinary when he checked in the morning (around 16:48). It wasn't until he checked in the afernoon (22:02) that he noticed abnormlly high latency on the pizza creation endpoint. 

For future improvement, certain alerts could be set into place to detect abormalities in the metrics. In this instance, an alert for abnormally high latency would be sent to Warren, or someone he designates, to resolve the problem much more immediately.

## Impact

For somewhere between 1 to 5 hours (the exact time of the attack was between 16:48 and 22:02 UTC) on 11/30/2024, our users experienced significant latency issues when trying to create pizza orders. While the orders still eventually went through, the severe latency spike made ordering pizzas much more inconvenient for the users.

This incident affected all 3 users who logged in during this timeframe, but didn't have any lasting consequences following the resolution.

As Warren's server hasn't gained popularity yet, no support tickets were filed, and social media largely ignored the incident.

## Timeline

All times are UTC.

- _16:48_ - Warren manually checks Grafana logs, simulates standard traffic (logins, orders, menu pulls, etc.), all seems normal.
- _22:02_ - Warren returns to manually check the Grafana logs for a second time.
- _22:03_ - Warren begins by testing the register endpoint. All seems normal.
- _22:05_ - Warren makes a login request followed by a logout request. All seems normal.
- _22:15_ - Warren makes the first pizza creation attempt. The metrics pick up a pizzaCreation latency of 32050ms. This is definitally a problem.
- _22:19_ - Warren attempts logging the same user in multiple times. The server allows it as it normally does.
- _22:22_ - Warren attempts creating an order with multiple pizzas. The JWT was seen changing on the frontend server.
- _22:25_ - Warren makes a get request for the menu. This works as it should.
- _22:27_ - Upon reviewing the JWT Pizza Factory logs, all seems well. It appears the factory is working, but working slowly.
- _22:38_ - After analyzing the code for a while, Warren attempts changing the order request endpoint to exlude "reportURL" in its response.
- _22:39_ - Warren attempts to push to GitHub, his Jest create order test fails due to high latency.
- _22:55_ - Warren starts closely analyzing the request and response data from the api docs.
- _23:10_ - Warren notices a "reportURL" seemingly appear out of nowhere in the order creation response. It contains a link.
- _23:20_ - Warren clicks the link in the create order response, the link activates a JSON response that says "chaos resolved."
- _23:22_ - Warren tries another order request, and a normal order returns immediately. This link appears to have solved the issue!
- _23:25_ - Warren makes several other order requests, all of which seem to respond.
- _23:26_ - Warren's Jest test finally passes, and the pizza-server pushes to GitHub as it should.



## Response

As previously mentioned, Warren was manually checking the Grafana logs today. He experienced a brief delay as he decided to go to his local temple to worship for a while (which was a decent excuse but still wasn't a great excuse). Upon returning he noticed the attack and began diagnosing. Fortunetly, Warren is the owner of the server, so he didn't need to alert any other managers of the attack.

# Root cause

The JWT Pizza Factory had some sort of vulnerability with it's latency. It appears as if somebody on their side broke the internal workings of the factory, as the factory JWT creation endpoint was the source of the slowness.

## Resolution

Warren began analyzing each of the endpoints on both the pizza-service side and the pizza factory side. He used this technique, along with Grafana metrics/logging, to systmatically analyze what was working and what wasn't working. After he discovered the issue was with creating orders, he began analyzing the order router's request and response JSON bodies. He soon discovered an abnormal "reportURL" embedded into the JWT Pizza response. Upon finding and activating this link, the latency problem solved itself.

In order to have discovered the problem faster, Warren could have called some of his workers and gotten their assistance with manually testing each of the endpoints.

# Prevention

This problem seems to have been on the JWT Pizza Factory side of things. They should have spent more time testing their JWT creation process, although it appears like their link was a sort of fail-safe. 

Warren's team should also take more responsibility in establishing effective and responsive alerting to be more responsive to the next attack.

# Action items

1. JWT Pizza Factory workers write unit tests to soundly prevent future attacks, especially with JWT creation.
2. Warren creates alerts for each of the JWT Pizza endpoints (ex. detecting high latency, too many users logging in at once, etc.).
3. Warren communicates with his team to create a healthy on-call schedule that benefits everyone.